# Writing about random numbers 

The core of Monte
Carlo methods depends upon good [pseudo-random number
generators](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pseudorandom_number_generator).
There are two opposing philosophical theories that:

1. randomness is impossible in universe
2. the universe is random


## "Randomness" in a Newtonian world

In Classical Newtonian physics, every action has an equal and opposite
reaction. Each effect is created by some cause. 

"We may regard the present state of the universe as the effect of its
past and the cause of its future. An intellect which at a certain moment
would know all forces that set nature in motion, and all positions of
all items of which nature is composed, if this intellect were also vast
enough to submit these data to analysis, it would embrace in a single
formula the movements of the greatest bodies of the universe and those
of the tiniest atom; for such an intellect nothing would be uncertain
and the future just like the past could be present before its eyes."

-Pierre Simon Laplace, _A Philosophical Essay on Probabilities_[1]

Laplace makes the point that in any system governed by known physics, we
can predict future outcomes based upon initial conditions. In Laplace's
world, it seems like everything is predictable and well-behaved. This is
true, until you consider chaotic systems and things like the Butterfly
effect. 

A Chaotic system is different from a random system, because a choatic
system follows predetermined rules, but small changes in initial
conditions lead to large changes in final outcomes. The results can look
random, but there is no randomness in the laws or predictions. 

<!-- update some examples and data from double pendulum -->

## Randomness in a random world

Modern physics involves the wave-particle duality of subatomic
particles, but this is still a set of deterministic physical laws that
make predictions about how the world works. The uncertainty principle
limits how accruately you can "know" position and momentum, but this
uncertainty is much smaller than almost all phenomena you can experience
e.g. uncertainty in electron positions might stretch to $\approx100~nm$. 

"I, at any rate, am convinced that [God] does not throw dice" 
-Albert Einstein [Letter to Max Borne]

Einstein disagreed with the idea that even Quantum Mechanics can
consider these theories as "random". 


## References 
**1.** Laplace, Pierre Simon, A Philosophical Essay on Probabilities,
translated into English from the original French 6th ed. by Truscott,
F.W. and Emory, F.L., Dover Publications (New York, 1951) p.4.
